.. module:: gpaw.response.g0w0
.. _gw tutorial:

=========================================================
Quasi-particle spectrum in the GW approximation: tutorial
=========================================================

For a brief introduction to the GW theory and the details of its
implementation in GPAW, see :ref:`gw_theory`.

More information can be found here:

    \F. HÃ¼ser, T. Olsen, and K. S. Thygesen

    `Quasiparticle GW calculations for solids, molecules, and
    two-dimensional materials`__

    Physical Review B, Vol. **87**, 235132 (2013)

    __ http://prb.aps.org/abstract/PRB/v87/i23/e235132


Quasi-particle spectrum of bulk silicon
=======================================

In the first part of the tutorial, the G0W0 calculator is introduced and the
quasi-particle spectrum of bulk silicon is calculated.


Groundstate calculation
-----------------------

First, we need to do a regular groundstate calculation. We do this in plane
wave mode and choose the LDA exchange-correlation functional. In order to
keep the computational efforts small, we start with (3x3x3) k-points and a
plane wave basis up to 200 eV.

.. literalinclude:: Si_groundstate.py

It takes a few seconds on a single CPU. The last line in the script creates a
.gpw file which contains all the informations of the system, including the
wavefunctions.

.. note::

    You can change the number of bands to be written out by using
    ``calc.diagonalize_full_hamiltonian(nbands=...)``.
    This will be useful for higher plane wave cutoffs.

    
The GW calculator
-----------------

Next, we set up the G0W0 calculator and calculate the quasi-particle spectrum
for all the k-points in the irreducible Brillouin zone and the specified
bands. In this case, silicon has 8 valence electrons and the bands are double
occupied. Setting ``bands=(3,5)`` means including band index 3 and 4 which is
the highest occupied band and the lowest unoccupied band.

.. literalinclude:: Si_gw.py

It takes about 5 minutes on a single CPU for the
:meth:`~gpaw.response.g0w0.G0W0.calculate` method to finish:

.. automethod:: gpaw.response.g0w0.G0W0.calculate

The dictionary is stored in ``Si-g0w0_results.pckl``.  From the dict it is
for example possible to extract the direct bandgap:

.. literalinclude:: get_gw_bandgap.py

with the result: 3.18 eV.

The possible input parameters of the G0W0 calculator are listed here:

.. autoclass:: gpaw.response.g0w0.G0W0


Convergence with respect to cutoff energy and number of k-points
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Can we trust the calculated value of the direct bandgap? Not yet. Check for
convergence with respect to the plane wave cutoff energy and number of k
points is necessary. This is done by changing the respective values in the
groundstate calculation and restarting. Script
:download:`Si_ecut_k_conv_GW.py` carries out the calculations and
:download:`Si_ecut_k_conv_plot_GW.py` plots the resulting data. It takes
about 12 hours on 2 xeon-8 CPUs (16 cores total). The resulting figure is
shown below.

.. image:: Si_GW.png
    :height: 400 px

A k-point sampling of (9x9x9) and 200 eV plane wave cutoff seems to give
results converged to within 0.05 eV. The calculation at these parameters took
a little more than 3 hours on 2 xeon-8 CPUs.


Frequency dependence
--------------------

Next, we should check the quality of the frequency grid used in the
calculation. Two parameters determine how the frequency grid looks.
``domega0`` and ``omega2``. Read more about these parameters in the tutorial
for the dielectric function :ref:`df_tutorial_freq`.

Running script :download:`Si_frequency_conv.py` calculates the direct band
gap using different frequency grids with ``domega0`` varying from 0.005 to
0.05 and ``omega2`` from 1 to 25. The resulting data is plotted in
:download:`Si_frequency_conv_plot.py` and the figure is shown below.

.. image:: Si_freq.png
    :height: 400 px

Converged results are obtained for ``domega0=0.02`` and ``omega2=10``, which
is very close to the default values.


Final results
-------------

A full G0W0 calculation at the values found above for the plane wave cutoff,
number of k-points and frequency sampling results in a direct bandgap of 3.35
eV. Hence the value of 3.18 eV calculated at first was not converged!

Another method for carrying out the frequency integration is the Plasmon Pole
approximation (PPA). Read more about it here :ref:`gw_theory_ppa`. This is
turned on by setting ``ppa = True`` in the G0W0 calculator (see
:download:`Si_converged_ppa.py`). Carrying out a full G0W0 calculation using
the converged parameters and the PPA gives a direct band gap of 3.34 eV,
which is in very good agreement with the result for the full frequency
integration but the calculation took only 1 hour and 35 minutes on 1 xeon-8
CPU!

.. note::

    If a calculation is very memory heavy, it is possible to set ``nblocks``
    to an integer larger than 1 but less than the amount of CPU cores running
    the calculation. With this, the response function is divided into blocks
    and each core gets to store a smaller matrix.

    
Quasi-particle spectrum of two-dimensional materials
====================================================

TBA


GW0 calculations
================

TBA
